# Bud Music Box language instruction set
This page describes the instruction set of the Bud Music Box language.


## General conventions
+ **Comments** are enclosed into symbols `{` and `}`. Nested comments are allowed.

+ **Integers** are expressed following the usual signed decimal notation.

  For instance, `0`, `127`, `-0`, `-17`,  and `- 17` are integers,

+ **Names** are strings of length at least $1$ and made of symbols in `a`-`z`, `A`-`Z`,
  `0`-`9`, `'`, or `_`, and starting with an alphabetic symbol or `'` or `_`.

  For instance, `p`, `p'`, `pattern_`, `res_pat_1`, and `__new''` are identifiers.

+ **Colors** are strings of length at least $2$, starting with `%` and then made of strings
  following the same rules as the ones of identifiers.

  For instance, `%c`, `%c'`, `%col_`, `%col_1`, and `%__new_color''` are colors.


## Syntax for multi-patterns
A multi-pattern is specified by the sequence of its atoms, that are degrees (expressed by
signed decimal integers) or rests (expressed by `.`). The multiple voices of a multi-pattern
are separated by a `+`.

For instance,
```
1 -1 . . 2 . 4   +   0 0 . 1 . -3 .   +   1 . 2 . 2 2 .   +   . 0 . 0 0 . 0
```
is a string specifying a multi-pattern. Moreover,
+ the of multiplicity of this multi-pattern is $4$ because it is made of four voices;
+ its arity is $4$ because each voice contains $4$ beats;
+ its length is $7$ since each voice is made of seven atoms.


## Messages
+ Error messages start by `??`.
+ Information messages start by `>>`.
+ Success messages start by `!!`.


## Instruction set


### Control instructions


#### Display information


##### Command
`show`

+ Prints the current internal data consisting of the specified data, including the scale,
  root note, tempo, MIDI programs, degree monoid, and multi-patterns.


##### Possible errors
This instruction cannot produce errors.


#### Generate the associated files of a multi-pattern 


##### Command
`write NAME`

+ `NAME` is a name bound to a multi-pattern.
+ Creates, within the underlying context of scale, root note, tempo, and MIDI programs,
    + an ABC file;
    + a postscript file;
    + and MIDI file;
  for the musical phrase encoded by the multi-pattern value of `NAME`. The created files are
  obtained by adding adequate extensions to the path of the run `Bud Music Box` program.
  Just before the extensions of the three created files, a suffix `_N` is inserted in order
  to obtain new file names. These files are put in the same directory as the one of the run
  program.

For instance, if the path of the run program is `Samples/First.bmb` and `pat` is a
well-defined identified of a multi-pattern, `write pat` creates the files
`Samples/First_0.abc`, `Samples/First_0.ps`, and `Samples/First_0.mid`. A second execution
of `write pat` creates the files `Samples/First_1.abc`, `Samples/First_1.ps`, and
`Samples/First_1.mid`.


##### Possible errors
+ `?? Unknown multi-pattern name.`: occurs when `NAME` is not bound to a multi-pattern.
+ `?? Scale not specified.`: occurs when no scale has been specified before executing this
  instruction.
+ `?? Root note not specified.`: occurs when no root note has been specified before
  executing this instruction.
+ `?? Tempo not specified.`: occurs when no tempo has been specified before executing this
  instruction.
+ `?? Degree monoid not specified.`: occurs when no degree monoid has been specified before
  executing this instruction.
+ `?? MIDI programs insufficiently specified.`: occurs when no MIDI programs have been
  specified before executing this instruction.
+ `?? Degrees outside MIDI note range.`: occurs when a degree of the multi-pattern which is
  the value of `NAME` corresponds to a note outside the interval between `0` and `127`.


#### Play a multi-pattern


##### Command
`play NAME`

+ `NAME` is a name bound to a multi-pattern.
+ Plays `PAT` according to the underlying context of scale, root note, tempo, and MIDI
  programs. This instruction create the same files as the ones generated by the instruction
  `write PAT`.


##### Possible errors
+ `?? Unknown multi-pattern name.`: occurs when `NAME` is not bound to a multi-pattern.
+ `?? Scale not specified.`: occurs when no scale has been specified before executing this
  instruction.
+ `?? Root note not specified.`: occurs when no root note has been specified before
  executing this instruction.
+ `?? Tempo not specified.`: occurs when no tempo has been specified before executing this
  instruction.
+ `?? Degree monoid not specified.`: occurs when no degree monoid has been specified before
  executing this instruction.
+ `?? MIDI programs insufficiently specified.`: occurs when no MIDI programs have been
  specified before executing this instruction.
+ `?? Degrees outside MIDI note range.`: occurs when a degree of the multi-pattern which is
  the value of `NAME` corresponds to a note outside the interval between `0` and `127`.
+ `?? Timidity failure.`: occurs when there is an error in playing the MIDI file of the
  multi-pattern which is the value of `NAME` raised by `timidity`.


### Context management


#### Setting a scale


##### Command
`scale STEP_1 ... STEP_k`

+ `STEP_1 ... STEP_k` is an integer composition (also named _profile_) specifying a
  $12$-TET scale.
+ Sets the underlying scale to the specified one.

For instance, `scale 2 1 2 2 1 2 2` sets the minor natural scale as underlying scale.


##### Possible errors
+ `?? Not a 12-TET scale.`: occurs when the sum of the integers forming the composition is
  not $12$.


#### Setting a root note


##### Command
`root NOTE`

+ `NOTE` is the MIDI code of a note between $0$ and $127$.
+ Sets the root of the underlying set of notes.

For instance, `root 60` sets the root note to the middle C.


##### Possible errors
+ `?? Invalid MIDI note code.`: occurs when the `NOTE` is outside the interval between `0`
  and `127`.


#### Setting a tempo
`tempo VAL`

+ `VAL` is a nonnegative integer.
+ Sets the tempo as `VAL` bpm. In each generated score files, each beat is denoted as one
  quarter note and each rest is denoted as one quarter rest. The tempo specifies the number
  of each of these in one minute.

For instance, `tempo 96` sets the tempo to `96` bpm.


#### Setting voice sounds
`sounds SOUND_1 ... SOUND_m`

+ `SOUND_1 ... SOUND_m` is a sequence of General MIDI sound programs, encoded as integers
  between $0$ and $127$.
+ Allocates to each potential $i$-th voice of each multi-pattern the specified sound.

For instance, `sounds 0 108` allocates to the $1$-st voice the _Acoustic Grand Piano_
MIDI program and to the $2$-nd voice, the _Kalimba_ MIDI program.


### Setting a degree monoid
`monoid DM`

+ `DM` is a degree monoid among the five possible ones:
    + `add`, for the additive monoid on integers;
    + `cyclic K`, for the cyclic monoid of order `K`, where `K` is a positive integer;
    + `mul`, for the multiplicative monoid on integers;
    + `mul-mod K`, for the multiplicative monoid modulo `K`, where `K` is a positive
      integer;
    + `max Z`, for the monoid on integers nonsmaller than `Z` for the $\max$ operation,
      where `Z` is an integer.
+ This encodes how to perform products on degrees for the compositions in the operads of
  multi-patterns.

For instance, `monoid cyclic 7` set the cyclic monoid of order $7$ as degree monoid.


### Multi-pattern manipulation

#### Naming a multi-pattern
`multi-pattern NAME PAT_STR`

+ `NAME` is an identifier of a multi-pattern, possibly not bounded to a multi-pattern.
+ `PAT_STR` is a string specifying a multi-pattern.
+ Bounds the specified identifier to the specified multi-pattern. In the sequel of the
  program, any instruction having identifiers of multi-patterns as arguments accept `NAME`
  as argument. In the case where `NAME` is already an identifier of a multi-pattern, this
  instruction forgets the previous definition.

For instance,
```
multi-pattern p1 0 . . 1 2 3 . . + 0 -5 . . . . 0 0
```
bounds the identifier `p1` to the specifier of multi-pattern.


#### Mirror image of a multi-pattern
`mirror NAME_RES NAME_SOURCE`

+ `NAME_RES` is an identifier of a multi-pattern, possibly not bounded to a multi-pattern.
+ `NAME_SOURCE` is an identifier of a multi-pattern, bounded to a multi-pattern.
+ Bounds `NAME_RES` to the multi-pattern defined as the mirror image of the multi-pattern
  bounded to `NAME-SOURCE`.


#### Inverse image of a multi-pattern
`inverse NAME PAT`

+ `NAME` is an identifier.
+ `PAT` is the name of a multi-pattern.
+ Bounds `NAME` to the multi-pattern defined as the inverse image of `PAT`.


#### Concatenate multi-patterns
`concatenate NAME PAT_1 ... PAT_n`

+ `NAME` is an identifier.
+ `PAT_1 ... PAT_n` is a list of $m$-multi-patterns names with $n \geq 2$.
+ Bounds `NAME` to the concatenation of `PAT_1 ... PAT_n`.


#### Repeat a multi-pattern with respect to concatenation
`concatenate-repeat NAME PAT VAL`

+ `NAME` is an identifier.
+ `PAT` is the name of a multi-pattern.
+ `VAL` is a nonnegative integer.
+ Bounds `NAME` to the multi-pattern defined as the `VAL` times repetition of `PAT`.


#### Stack multi-patterns
`stack NAME PAT_1 ... PAT_n`

+ `NAME` is an identifier.
+ `PAT_1 ... PAT_n` is a list of $m$-multi-patterns names with $n \geq 2$.
+ Bounds `NAME` to the stacking of `PAT_1 ... PAT_n`.


#### Repeat a multi-pattern with respect to stack
`stack-repeat NAME PAT VAL`
TODO


#### Partial composition of two multi-patterns
`partial-compose NAME PAT_1 POS PAT_2`

+ `NAME` is an identifier.
+ `PAT_1` is the name of an $m$-multi-pattern of arity $n$.
+ `POS` is an integer between $1$ and $n$.
+ `PAT_2` is the name an $m$-multi-pattern.
+ Bounds `NAME` to the partial composition of `PAT_2` at position `POS` in `PAT_1`.


#### Full composition of multi-patterns
`full-compose NAME PAT PAT_1 ... PAT_n`

+ `NAME` is an identifier.
+ `PAT` is the name of an $m$-multi-pattern of arity $n$.
+ `PAT_1`, ..., `PAT_n` are names of $m$-multi-patterns.
+ Bounds `NAME` to the full composition of `PAT` with `PAT_1`, ..., `PAT_n`.


#### Homogeneous composition of two multi-patterns
`binarily-compose NAME PAT_1 PAT_2`

+ `NAME` is an identifier.
+ `PAT_1` is the name of an $m$-multi-pattern.
+ `PAT_2` is the name of an $m$-multi-pattern.
+ Bounds `NAME` to the binary composition of `PAT_1` with `PAT_2`.


### Bud grammar manipulation

#### Colorize a multi-pattern
`colorize NAME %OUT | PAT | %IN_1 ... %IN_n`

+ `NAME` is an identifier.
+ `OUT` is a color.
+ `PAT` is a multi-pattern of arity $n$.
+ `IN_1 ... IN_n` is a list of colors.
+ Bounds the specified identifier to the colored multi-pattern obtained by surrounding the
  multi-pattern `PAT` with the output color `OUT` and the input colors `IN_1 ... IN_n`.


#### Mono-colorize a multi-pattern
`mono-colorize NAME %OUT | PAT | %IN`

+ `NAME` is an identifier.
+ `OUT` is a color.
+ `PAT` is a multi-pattern of arity $n$.
+ `IN` is a color.
+ Bounds the specified identifier to the colored multi-pattern obtained by surrounding the
  multi-pattern `PAT` with the output color `OUT` and the input colors `IN ... IN`.


#### Randomly generate a multi-pattern
`generate NAME SHAPE SIZE %COL CPAT_1 ... CPAT_n`

+ `NAME` is an identifier.
+ `SHAPE` is `partial`, `full`, or `colored`.
+ `SIZE` is a nonnegative integer value.
+ `COL` is a color.
+ `CPAT_1 ... CPAT_n` is a list of names of colored multi-patterns.
+ Bounds `NAME` to a pattern randomly generated from the inputted colored patterns, with the
  specified size, the specified generation shape, and the specified initial color. This uses
  bud generating systems and random generation algorithms.

